<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
    <head>
        <title>Summary</title>
        <link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
        <meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:dd0ab1fe-cf2d-4e17-8acb-531b7ebebf1a" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    </head>

    <body>
        <section>

                            <header>
                    <h1 class="header-title">Summary</h1>
                </header>
            
            <article>
                
<p>In this chapter, we briefly outlined the major concepts that will appear throughout this book. From the code examples, you should now be able to visually identify functional style. We also mentioned some of the reasons why these concepts are useful. In the remaining chapters, we will provide full context to when and why each technique would be appropriate. In that context, we will also provide the knowledge required to master the techniques and start using functional practices.</p>
<p>From this chapter, we learned to parameterize as much as possible, and that functions can be used as parameters, to define complex behavior by combining simple behaviors, and that it is safe to use threads however you want in Rust as long as it compiles.</p>
<p>This book is structured to introduce simpler concepts first, then, as the book continues, some concepts may become more abstract or technical. Also, all techniques will be introduced in the context of an ongoing project. The project will control an elevator system, and the requirements will gradually become more demanding as the book progresses.</p>


            </article>

            
        </section>
    </body>

</html>