<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
    <head>
        <title>Functional Control Flow</title>
        <link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
        <meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:dd0ab1fe-cf2d-4e17-8acb-531b7ebebf1a" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    </head>

    <body>
        <section>

                            <header>
                    <h1 class="header-title">Functional Control Flow</h1>
                </header>
            
            <article>
                
<ol>
<li>What is the ternary operator?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">The if condition is the ternary operator but has the unique Rust syntax of <kbd>if a { b } else { c }</kbd>.</p>
<ol start="2">
<li>What is another name for unit tests?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">Unit tests are also called <strong>whitebox testing</strong>.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>What is another name for integration tests?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">Integration tests are also called <strong>blackbox testing</strong>.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>What is declarative programming?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">Declarative programming avoids implementation details when describing a program.</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>What is imperative programming?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">Imperative programming focuses on implementation details when describing a program.</p>
<ol start="6">
<li>What is defined in the iterator trait?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">The iterator trait is defined by an associated <kbd>Item</kbd> type, and the required <kbd>next</kbd> method.</p>
<ol start="7">
<li>In which direction will fold traverse the iterator sequence?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px"><kbd>fold</kbd> will traverse an iterator from left to right, or more specifically, from first to last.</p>
<ol start="8">
<li>What is a dependency graph?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">A dependency graph is a directed graph that describes the dependency relationships between nodes. In our case, we use this to describe relationships of the form <em>x</em> must happen before <em>y</em>.</p>
<ol start="9">
<li>What are the two constructors of <kbd>Option</kbd>?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px"><kbd>Option</kbd> can be created as <kbd>Some(x)</kbd> or <kbd>None</kbd>.</p>


            </article>

            
        </section>
    </body>

</html>