<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
    <head>
        <title>Generics and Polymorphism</title>
        <link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
        <meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:dd0ab1fe-cf2d-4e17-8acb-531b7ebebf1a" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
    </head>

    <body>
        <section>

                            <header>
                    <h1 class="header-title">Generics and Polymorphism</h1>
                </header>
            
            <article>
                
<ol>
<li>What is an algebraic data type?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">An algebraic data type i<span>s a kind of composite</span> <span>type formed by combining other types.</span></p>
<ol start="2">
<li>What is polymorphism?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">Polymorphism is the quality of having many forms.</p>
<ol start="3">
<li>What is parametric polymorphism?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">Parametric polymorphism is  the quality of having many forms according to a parameter.</p>
<ol start="4">
<li>What is a ground type?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">A ground type is a type that has no parameters, modifiers, or substitutions. For example, <kbd>i32</kbd> or <kbd>String</kbd>.</p>
<ol start="5">
<li>What is Universal Function Call syntax?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">Universal Function Call syntax is used to disambiguate functions or methods. It looks like <span><kbd>Foo::f(&amp;b)</kbd> instead of <kbd>b.f()</kbd>.</span></p>
<div class="page">
<div class="layoutArea">
<div class="column">
<ol start="6">
<li>What are the possible type signatures of a trait object?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">A trait object is any signature for a trait that will give it a known size at compile time. Common examples of this are <kbd>&amp;Trait</kbd> or <kbd>Box&lt;Trait&gt;</kbd>.</p>
<ol start="7">
<li>What are two ways to obscure type information?</li>
</ol>
<p style="padding-left: 60px">Trait objects and traits in general hide information. Associated types also reduce the amount of information necessary to interact with code.</p>
<ol start="8">
<li>How is a subtrait declared?</li>
</ol>
<div class="page">
<div class="layoutArea">
<div class="column">
<pre style="padding-left: 60px"><span>trait SuperTrait: SubTrait1 + SubTrait2 {}</span></pre></div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>


            </article>

            
        </section>
    </body>

</html>